Unit I Introduction to Data Science and Big Data 

Basics and need of Data Science and Big Data, Applications of Data Science, Data explosion, 5 V’s
of Big Data, Relationship between Data Science and Information Science, Business intelligence versus
Data Science, Data Science Life Cycle, Data: Data Types, Data Collection. Need of Data wrangling,
Methods: Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data Reduction, Data Transformation, Data Discretization.

1. Basics and Need of Data Science and Big Data
Data Science is an interdisciplinary field that uses statistical methods, algorithms, and machine learning techniques to extract insights and knowledge from structured and unstructured data.

Big Data refers to datasets that are too large or complex for traditional data-processing tools to handle effectively.

Need: With the rapid growth of digital data (from social media, sensors, transactions, etc.), organizations need Data Science to analyze and derive value from this data to make informed decisions, predict trends, and optimize processes.

2. Applications of Data Science
Healthcare: Disease prediction, personalized medicine.

Finance: Fraud detection, credit scoring.

Retail: Customer segmentation, recommendation engines.

Marketing: Sentiment analysis, customer lifetime value.

Transportation: Route optimization, self-driving vehicles.

Sports: Performance analysis, player evaluation.

3. Data Explosion
Refers to the exponential increase in data generation due to digitization, IoT, mobile devices, and social media.

Results in vast amounts of data being produced every second, necessitating advanced tools and techniques to manage and analyze it.

4. The 5 V’s of Big Data
Volume – Amount of data generated.

Velocity – Speed of data generation and processing.

Variety – Different types of data (text, images, video, etc.).

Veracity – Trustworthiness and quality of the data.

Value – Insights and benefits gained from analyzing data.

5. Relationship Between Data Science and Information Science
Information Science deals with the collection, classification, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of information.

Data Science extends this by applying algorithms and statistical models to derive actionable insights.

Overlap: Both involve managing and making sense of data, but Data Science is more focused on predictive analytics and decision-making.

6. Business Intelligence (BI) vs Data Science

Feature	Business Intelligence	Data Science
Focus	Descriptive analytics	Predictive and prescriptive analytics
Data Usage	Structured historical data	Structured and unstructured data
Tools	Dashboards, OLAP, reports	ML models, statistical programming
Goal	Understanding past performance	Forecasting and decision optimization
7. Data Science Life Cycle
Problem Definition

Data Collection

Data Preparation (Wrangling)

Exploratory Data Analysis

Modeling (ML Algorithms)

Evaluation

Deployment

Monitoring and Maintenance

8. Data: Types and Collection
Data Types:

Structured (e.g., SQL databases),

Unstructured (e.g., videos, emails),

Semi-structured (e.g., XML, JSON).

Collection Methods:

Surveys, Web scraping, IoT devices, APIs, Transaction logs.

9. Need for Data Wrangling
Ensures data quality and consistency.

Prepares raw data for analysis by handling missing values, correcting errors, and ensuring correct format.

10. Data Wrangling Methods
Data Cleaning: Handling missing values, correcting inconsistent entries.

Data Integration: Combining data from multiple sources into a cohesive dataset.

Data Reduction: Reducing volume without losing valuable information (e.g., PCA, sampling).

Data Transformation: Normalization, encoding, and scaling to prepare data for modeling.

Data Discretization: Converting continuous data into categorical bins (e.g., age groups).

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unit II Statistical Inference 07 Hours
Need of statistics in Data Science and Big Data Analytics, Measures of Central Tendency: Mean,
Median, Mode, Mid-range. Measures of Dispersion: Range, Variance, Mean Deviation, Standard
Deviation. Bayes theorem, Basics and need of hypothesis and hypothesis testing, Pearson Correlation,
Sample Hypothesis testing, Chi-Square Tests, t-test.

1. Need of Statistics in Data Science and Big Data Analytics
Statistics provides the foundation for:

Summarizing and understanding data distributions.

Making inferences and predictions from sample data.

Identifying patterns, trends, and outliers.

Building and validating machine learning models.

In Big Data, statistics helps to:

Reduce dimensionality,

Handle uncertainty,

Enable evidence-based decision-making.

2. Measures of Central Tendency
These describe the "center" or "average" of a dataset:

Mean: Sum of all values divided by the number of values.

Median: Middle value when data is ordered.

Mode: Most frequently occurring value.

Mid-range: Average of the minimum and maximum values.

3. Measures of Dispersion
These indicate how spread out the data is:

Range: Difference between the maximum and minimum values.

Variance: Average of the squared deviations from the mean.

Mean Deviation (MAD): Average of the absolute deviations from the mean.

Standard Deviation: Square root of the variance; shows spread in original units.

4. Bayes’ Theorem
A foundational concept in probability that describes the probability of an event based on prior knowledge.

𝑃
(
𝐴
∣
𝐵
)
=
𝑃
(
𝐵
∣
𝐴
)
⋅
𝑃
(
𝐴
)
𝑃
(
𝐵
)
P(A∣B)= 
P(B)
P(B∣A)⋅P(A)
​
 
Use in Data Science:

Spam filtering, recommendation systems, classification models (e.g., Naïve Bayes).

5. Hypothesis and Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis: An assumption or claim about a population parameter.

Types:

Null Hypothesis (H₀): No effect or difference.

Alternative Hypothesis (H₁): There is an effect or difference.

Need: Allows data scientists to make data-driven decisions and assess model assumptions.

6. Pearson Correlation
Measures the linear relationship between two variables.

Value ranges from -1 (perfect negative) to +1 (perfect positive), with 0 indicating no linear correlation.

7. Sample Hypothesis Testing
Involves selecting a sample from a population to test hypotheses.

Steps:

State hypotheses.

Choose significance level (α).

Calculate test statistic.

Make decision based on p-value or critical value.

8. Chi-Square Tests
Used for categorical data:

Chi-Square Test of Independence: Tests if two variables are independent.

Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit Test: Tests if a sample distribution fits a theoretical distribution.

9. t-Test
Compares the means of two groups.

Types:

One-sample t-test: Compare sample mean to a known value.

Two-sample t-test: Compare means of two independent samples.

Paired t-test: Compare means from the same group at different times.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Unit III Big Data Analytics Life Cycle 07 Hours
Introduction to Big Data, sources of Big Data, Data Analytic Lifecycle: Introduction, Phase 1:
Discovery, Phase 2: Data Preparation, Phase 3: Model Planning, Phase 4: Model Building, Phase 5:
Communication results, Phase 6: Operationalize


1. Introduction to Big Data
Big Data refers to extremely large datasets that are complex, fast-growing, and varied.

Traditional data processing tools struggle to handle Big Data efficiently.

Big Data is often characterized by the 5 V’s: Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity, and Value.

2. Sources of Big Data
Social Media: Twitter, Facebook, Instagram generate vast unstructured text, image, and video data.

Sensors & IoT Devices: Smart homes, industrial sensors, wearables.

Web Logs & Clickstreams: User activity on websites and mobile apps.

Transactional Data: E-commerce purchases, banking records.

Machine-generated Data: Logs from servers, manufacturing data.

Multimedia Data: Audio, video from surveillance, entertainment.

3. Data Analytic Life Cycle – Introduction
The Big Data Analytics Life Cycle is a structured process for managing data science and analytics projects. It ensures systematic handling from data collection to delivering actionable insights.

4. Phases of the Big Data Analytics Life Cycle
Phase 1: Discovery
Define the business problem or analytics goal.

Identify key stakeholders and objectives.

Assess data sources, availability, and tools required.

Deliverables: Problem definition document, resource plan.

Phase 2: Data Preparation
Collect, explore, clean, and format data.

May involve data wrangling tasks such as:

Handling missing values,

Data normalization,

Merging datasets.

Deliverables: Clean dataset ready for analysis.

Phase 3: Model Planning
Determine the analytics techniques to use (e.g., regression, clustering).

Choose appropriate tools (e.g., R, Python, Spark).

Create a blueprint of the data flow and model architecture.

Deliverables: Analytics plan and modeling strategy.

Phase 4: Model Building
Develop and train predictive or descriptive models.

Split data into training/testing sets.

Fine-tune algorithms and validate model performance.

Deliverables: Trained model(s), evaluation metrics (e.g., accuracy, precision).

Phase 5: Communicate Results
Translate technical findings into business insights.

Use visualizations (charts, dashboards) and reports.

Engage stakeholders for feedback and decisions.

Deliverables: Presentation/report summarizing insights and implications.

Phase 6: Operationalize
Deploy the model into production environment.

Set up monitoring for performance and retraining.

Automate workflows if needed.

Deliverables: Finalized system, documentation, ongoing maintenance plan.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unit IV Predictive Big Data Analytics with Python 07 Hours
Introduction, Essential Python Libraries, Basic examples. Data Preprocessing: Removing
Duplicates, Transformation of Data using function or mapping, replacing values, Handling Missing
Data. Analytics Types: Predictive, Descriptive and Prescriptive. Association Rules: Apriori
Algorithm, FP growth. Regression: Linear Regression, Logistic Regression. Classification: Naïve
Bayes, Decision Trees. Introduction to Scikit-learn, Installations, Dataset, matplotlib, filling missing
values, Regression and Classification using Scikit-learn

1. Introduction
Predictive Analytics uses statistical techniques and machine learning to forecast future outcomes based on historical data.

Python is a widely-used programming language in data science due to its simplicity and strong ecosystem of libraries for analytics.

2. Essential Python Libraries
NumPy: Efficient array operations and numerical computing.

Pandas: Data manipulation and analysis using DataFrames.

Matplotlib / Seaborn: Visualization of data.

Scikit-learn: Machine learning algorithms and tools.

SciPy: Advanced scientific and technical computing.

3. Basic Python Examples
Reading and writing CSV files using Pandas.

Basic plotting with Matplotlib.

Using NumPy for statistical summaries and matrix operations.

4. Data Preprocessing
Essential for cleaning and preparing data before analysis:

Removing Duplicates: Using df.drop_duplicates().

Transformation Using Functions or Mapping: Apply custom or built-in functions using apply(), map().

Replacing Values: Using replace() to correct or unify values.

Handling Missing Data:

Detect with isnull() or info().

Fill missing values: fillna().

Drop missing rows/columns: dropna().

5. Types of Analytics
Descriptive Analytics: Summarizes historical data (e.g., dashboards).

Predictive Analytics: Uses historical data to predict future outcomes (e.g., regression).

Prescriptive Analytics: Suggests actions using optimization and simulation.

6. Association Rules
Used to discover relationships between variables in large datasets:

Apriori Algorithm: Identifies frequent itemsets and derives association rules.

FP-Growth (Frequent Pattern Growth): Faster, memory-efficient algorithm for mining frequent itemsets.

7. Regression Techniques
Linear Regression:

Predicts a continuous output.

Model: 
𝑦
=
𝑚
𝑥
+
𝑏
y=mx+b

Logistic Regression:

Used for binary classification.

Outputs a probability and maps it to a class using a threshold.

8. Classification Techniques
Naïve Bayes:

Probabilistic classifier based on Bayes’ Theorem.

Assumes features are independent.

Decision Trees:

Flowchart-like model where data is split on feature values.

Easy to interpret and visualize.

9. Introduction to Scikit-learn
A powerful and easy-to-use machine learning library.

Includes tools for:

Preprocessing,

Regression,

Classification,

Model evaluation and selection.

10. Using Scikit-learn
Installation: pip install scikit-learn

Datasets: Built-in datasets like load_iris(), load_boston(), or load your own using Pandas.

matplotlib: Used to visualize data distributions and model outputs.

Handling Missing Values:

SimpleImputer for filling missing values with mean, median, etc.

Regression and Classification:

Import model: from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression

Fit model: model.fit(X_train, y_train)

Predict: model.predict(X_test)

Evaluate: Accuracy, MSE, confusion matrix, etc.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unit V Big Data Analytics and Model Evaluation 07 Hours
Clustering Algorithms: K-Means, Hierarchical Clustering, Time-series analysis. Introduction to
Text Analysis: Text-preprocessing, Bag of words, TF-IDF and topics. Need and Introduction to social
network analysis, Introduction to business analysis. Model Evaluation and Selection: Metrics for
Evaluating Classifier Performance, Holdout Method and Random Subsampling, Parameter Tuning and
Optimization, Result Interpretation, Clustering and Time-series analysis using Scikit-learn,
sklearn.metrics, Confusion matrix, AUC-ROC Curves, Elbow plot.

1. Clustering Algorithms
a. K-Means Clustering
Partitions data into K clusters by minimizing intra-cluster variance.

Uses centroid-based grouping.

Iterative process: assign points → update centroids → repeat.

Best for large datasets.

b. Hierarchical Clustering
Builds a tree (dendrogram) of clusters.

Two types:

Agglomerative (bottom-up)

Divisive (top-down)

Does not require the number of clusters beforehand.

c. Time-Series Analysis
Analyzes sequential data over time.

Applications: stock prices, weather data, sales forecasting.

Focuses on trend, seasonality, and noise.

2. Introduction to Text Analysis
Text Preprocessing:

Tokenization, stopword removal, stemming/lemmatization.

Bag of Words (BoW):

Converts text into a matrix of word counts.

TF-IDF (Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency):

Weighs words based on their importance in a document relative to all documents.

Topic Modeling (e.g., LDA):

Uncovers hidden thematic structures in text data.

3. Social Network Analysis (SNA)
Need: To analyze relationships and interactions in social structures (e.g., Facebook, Twitter).

Applications:

Influence detection,

Community detection,

Information diffusion.

Metrics: Degree centrality, betweenness centrality, clustering coefficient.

4. Introduction to Business Analysis
Uses data to inform strategic and operational business decisions.

Involves descriptive and predictive analytics, dashboards, and key performance indicators (KPIs).

5. Model Evaluation and Selection
a. Metrics for Classifier Performance
Accuracy: Correct predictions / total predictions.

Precision: True Positives / (True Positives + False Positives).

Recall (Sensitivity): True Positives / (True Positives + False Negatives).

F1 Score: Harmonic mean of precision and recall.

AUC-ROC Curve: Evaluates performance across thresholds; good for imbalanced datasets.

b. Holdout Method and Random Subsampling
Holdout: Split data into training and testing sets (e.g., 70/30).

Random Subsampling: Multiple random splits to evaluate consistency.

c. Parameter Tuning and Optimization
Grid Search / Random Search: Test different hyperparameter combinations.

Cross-validation (e.g., k-fold): Ensures stability and generalization.

d. Result Interpretation
Translate model results into business or practical insights.

Focus on trade-offs (e.g., precision vs recall) depending on the use case.

6. Practical with Scikit-learn
Clustering:

KMeans, AgglomerativeClustering in sklearn.cluster.

Time-Series:

Use Pandas for indexing time-based data.

Evaluation Tools:

sklearn.metrics: accuracy_score, precision_score, confusion_matrix, roc_auc_score.

Confusion Matrix:

2x2 table showing TP, FP, FN, TN.

AUC-ROC Curve:

Plots True Positive Rate vs False Positive Rate.

Elbow Plot:

Used to choose the optimal number of clusters in K-means.

Plot cost (inertia) vs number of clusters.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unit VI Data Visualization and Hadoop 07 Hours
Introduction to Data Visualization, Challenges to Big data visualization, Types of data visualization,
Data Visualization Techniques, Visualizing Big Data, Tools used in Data Visualization, Hadoop
ecosystem, Map Reduce, Pig, Hive, Analytical techniques used in Big data visualization. Data
Visualization using Python: Line plot, Scatter plot, Histogram, Density plot, Box- plot.

1. Introduction to Data Visualization
Data visualization is the graphical representation of information and data using visual elements like charts, graphs, and maps.

Helps in understanding trends, patterns, and outliers in data.

Essential in Big Data analytics for interpreting large-scale complex data.

2. Challenges in Big Data Visualization
Scalability: Handling millions/billions of records.

Speed: Real-time rendering of data streams.

Variety: Visualizing structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data.

Interactivity: Designing responsive and interactive visuals for user exploration.

Storage and processing: Integrating with distributed systems like Hadoop/Spark.

3. Types of Data Visualization
Univariate: Single variable (e.g., bar chart, histogram).

Bivariate: Two variables (e.g., scatter plot).

Multivariate: More than two variables (e.g., heatmaps, pair plots).

Time-series: Trends over time (e.g., line chart).

Geospatial: Map-based visualization (e.g., choropleth map).

Network: Relationship and graph visualizations.

4. Data Visualization Techniques
Summarization (mean, median)

Trend analysis (moving averages)

Outlier detection (box plots)

Clustering patterns (color mapping)

Dimensionality reduction (PCA visualizations)

5. Visualizing Big Data
Use of distributed systems for rendering (e.g., D3.js with Spark backend).

Sampling, aggregation, and filtering are often needed to visualize huge datasets.

Interactive dashboards (e.g., Tableau, Power BI, Dash).

6. Tools Used in Data Visualization
Python Libraries: Matplotlib, Seaborn, Plotly, Bokeh, Altair.

Dashboard Tools: Tableau, Power BI, Google Data Studio.

Big Data Visualization Tools: Kibana, Apache Superset, Grafana.

Web-Based: D3.js, Chart.js, Google Charts.

7. Hadoop Ecosystem
Hadoop: An open-source framework for distributed storage (HDFS) and processing (MapReduce).

Key Components:
HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System): For data storage across multiple nodes.

MapReduce: Programming model for parallel data processing.

Pig: A high-level scripting language (Pig Latin) for data flow tasks.

Hive: SQL-like interface for querying large datasets stored in HDFS.

8. Analytical Techniques in Big Data Visualization
Aggregation (summarizing big data into manageable insights)

Data mining and pattern recognition

Real-time stream visualization

Cluster-based segmentation

Trend forecasting and anomaly detection

9. Data Visualization Using Python
a. Line Plot
Shows trends over time or sequences.

matplotlib.pyplot.plot()

b. Scatter Plot
Visualizes correlation between two continuous variables.

plt.scatter(x, y)

c. Histogram
Represents distribution of a numeric variable.

plt.hist(data, bins=n)

d. Density Plot
Smooth version of a histogram.

seaborn.kdeplot(data)

e. Box Plot
Displays median, quartiles, and outliers.

seaborn.boxplot(data=data)
